---
layout: post
title:  "Google BERT Model in Tensorflow 2.0"
last_modified_date: 2021-02-06
categories: [dev]
tags: [python, Tensorflow, BERT, NLP]
---


## Tensorflow 1.x and 2.x
If you have experienced any branch of deep learning, you must be familiar with Tensorflow, at least you know what it is. It's also highly likely that you also know how infamous Tensorflow is in terms of compatibility between 1.x and 2.x versions as Google upended the whole framework (despite leaving 1.x compatible functions in 2.x).


## Deep Learning and Encoders for NLP
And, if you are learning or working on NLPs, you must be familiar with popular deep learning structures, including Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)and Long Short-Term Short Memory (LSTM), the two most famous structures.

Encoders, while unnecessary in deep learning, can alleviate the burden of processing. They sit on the earlier stage and preprocess text inputs slimmer or better fit for learning processes in the later steps. One example is WordVec (Word-to-Vector), which converts texts to integer vectors and thereby simplifying later multiplications (Vector multiplications).

The other one, the state-of-the-art model is `BERT`, short for Bidirectional Encoder Representations for Transformers by Google. It is known to understand human texts pretty well, top of the league indeed. The caveat is, it was developed with Tensorflow 1.x in mind. 

The world has changed and Tensorflow 2.x has taken place although many practitioners are still forced to used 1.x version or compatible modules in 2.x.


## BERT in Tensorflow 2.x
The original team who developed BERT at Google hasn't upgraded it up to Tensorflow 2.x and doesn't seem to have plans on it.

However, Tensorflow team, another branch at the same company, did implement BERT model to work with Tensorflow 2.x.

While they changed a few parameters due to restructuring of the underlying Tensorflow Frameworks, the majority of functions work well.

Folks who are interested can visit `tensorflow/models` [Github](https://github.com/tensorflow/models) of Tensorflow team.